>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY SEPTEMBER, 6:
CONFRONTING ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS.
THE PRESIDENT SAYS A STRONG
GROUND GAME IS NEEDED, BUT WITH
WHAT TROOPS AND WHEN?
UNEMPLOYMENT IS DOWN AGAIN BUT
LARGELY BECAUSE EVEN MORE PEOPLE
HAVE DROPPED OUT OF THE
WORKFORCE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
DETECTING CANCER BY USING A
DOG’S EXTRAORDINARY SENSE OF
SMELL.
HOW IT MIGHT LEAD TO FUTURE
DIAGNOSTIC BREAKTHROUGHS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN A MAJOR REVERSAL, WHITE HOUSE
OFFICIALS SAID TODAY PRESIDENT
OBAMA WILL DELAY ANY EXECUTIVE
ACTION TO RESHAPE THE NATION’S
IMMIGRATION SYSTEM UNTIL AFTER
THIS NOVEMBER’S MID-TERM
ELECTIONS.
THE PRESIDENT HAD PLEDGED TO ACT
BY THE END OF THE SUMMER.
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS ARE NOW
SAYING HE WILL DO SO BEFORE THE
END OF THE YEAR.
THE DECISION TO DELAY THE
PROCESS IS SEEN AS AN EFFORT TO
HELP DEMOCRATS IN DIFFICULT
REELECTION RACES.
NEARLY 20% OF WOMEN IN THE
UNITED STATES HAVE BEEN RAPED
AND NEARLY 44% HAVE BEEN THE
VICTIMS OF SOME SORT OF SEXUAL
VIOLENCE.
THIS, ACCORDING TO A NEW REPORT
RELEASED YESTERDAY BY THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL.
THE FINDINGS WERE BASED ON A
SURVEY OF 12,000 PEOPLE
CONDUCTED ON BOTH CELL PHONES
AND LANDLINES.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
VIOLENCE IS REPORTEDLY
PERPETRATED BY PAST PARTNERS OR
ACQUAINTANCES.
A SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE, LED BY
MICHIGAN DEMOCRAT CARL LEVIN,
HAS CONCLUDED THAT THE I.R.S.
INAPPROPRIATELY TARGETED TAX-
EXEMPT GROUPS BUT SAID IT FOUND
NO EVIDENCE OF POLITICAL BIAS.
THE COMMITTEE SAID LIBERAL
GROUPS EXPERIENCED "THE SAME
MISTREATMENT" AS TEA PARTY
GROUPS.
A DISSENTING REPORT BY
REPUBLICANS SAID 83% OF THE
TARGETED GROUPS WERE
CONSERVATIVE-LEANING.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
THROUGHOUT PARTS OF THE UPPER
MIDWEST ARE STILL WITHOUT POWER
FOLLOWING SEVERE STORMS
YESTERDAY AND OVERNIGHT.
IN THE CHICAGO AREA, 70-MILE-AN-
HOUR WINDS RIPPED ROOFS OFF
BUILDINGS, BROUGHT DOWN TREES
AND BLEW OVER A SEMI ON A
HIGHWAY OVERPASS.
ABOUT 100,000 CUSTOMERS LOST
POWER THERE.
ANOTHER 400,000 MICHIGAN
RESIDENTS LOST POWER AFTER THE
STORM MOVED THERE.
AT LEAST ONE PERSON WAS KILLED.
TURNING OVERSEAS, LIFE APPEARED
TO BE RETURNING TO NORMAL TODAY
IN MUCH OF EASTERN UKRAINE
FOLLOWING YESTERDAY’S
ANNOUNCEMENT OF A CEASE-FIRE.
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT TROOPS HAD
BATTLED PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS
IN THE AREA NEAR RUSSIA FOR
SEVERAL MONTHS.
RECENTLY, NATO SAID RUSSIAN
FORCES CROSSED THE BORDER INTO
UKRAINE AND PUSHED BACK
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
CONFERRED BY PHONE TODAY WITH
UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO.
POROSHENKO SAID LATER THE TWO
DISCUSSED WAYS TO MAKE THE
CEASE-FIRE MORE STABLE.
THE TWO SIDES ARE ALSO
EXCHANGING PRISONERS.
IN WEST AFRICA, OFFICIALS IN
SIERRA LEONE SAY THEY WILL
IMPOSE A THREE-DAY NATIONWIDE
LOCKDOWN LATER THIS MONTH TO TRY
AND STOP THE SPREAD OF THE EBOLA
VIRUS.
PEOPLE IN THE NATION OF SIX
MILLION WILL NOT BE ALLOWED TO
LEAVE THEIR HOMES.
HEALTH WORKERS HOPE THE MOVE
WILL HELP THEM TO IDENTIFY AND
ISOLATE NEW EBOLA VIRUS CASES.
MORE THAN 2,100 PEOPLE IN FOUR
WEST AFRICAN COUNTRIES HAVE DIED
DURING THIS EBOLA OUTBREAK.
AND SYRIAN GOVERNMENT WARPLANES
TODAY ATTACKED ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS IN THE NORTH OF THAT
COUNTRY NEAR TURKEY.
AT LEAST 25 PEOPLE REPORTEDLY
WERE KILLED, MANY OF THEM
CIVILIANS WHO DIED WHEN A
MISSILE HIT A BAKERY CROWDED
WITH SHOPPERS.
YESTERDAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA SPOKE
ABOUT THE NEED TO BOLSTER IRAQI
MILITARY FORCES TO FIGHT THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
>> WE CAN SUPPORT THEM FROM THE
AIR, BUT ULTIMATELY WE’RE GOING
TO NEED A STRONG GROUND GAME.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
EFFORTS TO DEFEAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE, WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM
WASHINGTON BY ANTHONY CORDESMAN.
HE IS WITH THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AND WAS THE DIRECTOR OF
INTELLIGENCE ASSESSMENT IN THE
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE.
MR. CORDESMAN, THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES HAS SAID THAT
WE NEED A GROUND GAME, A
RESPONSE; A PARTIAL RESPONSE
FROM THE REGION MIGHT BE "YOU
AND WHAT ARMY?"
SO WHO ARE THE PEOPLE WHO WOULD
ACTUALLY BE ON THE GROUND AND
HELP TACKLE ISIS?
>> THE IRAQI FORCES ARE
RELATIVELY LARGE, COMPARED TO
ANY ESTIMATE OF WHAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE’S FORCES ARE.
IF YOU PROVIDE THE CAPABILITY
AND TRAINING TO MAKE THOSE IRAQI
FORCES MORE EFFECTIVE, IF YOU
GIVE THE KURDISH PESHMERGA
BETTER ARMS, YOU REALLY HAVE A
FORCE ON THE GROUND THAT IS
SIGNIFICANTLY SUPERIOR TO WHAT
THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS.
IF YOU THROW INTO THAT U.S.
AIRPOWER, AND THAT OF SOME OTHER
COUNTRIES, APPLIED NOT ONLY IN
IRAQ BUT IN SYRIA, YOU HAVE A
DECISIVE AMOUNT OF FIREPOWER.
AND IF YOU ADD TO THIS THE
ABILITY TO SEAL OFF THE ISLAMIC
STATE ON THE BORDERS OF THE
AREAS IT OCCUPIES, TO CUT OFF
ITS ECONOMIC STRUCTURE AND
REDUCE ITS FLOW OF VOLUNTEERS,
IN COMBINATION, THAT’S A LOT OF
LEVERAGE.
IT’S ALSO A LOT OF "IFS."
BUT THE PROBLEM IS NOT SO MUCH
THE GROUND GAME.
THE PROBLEM IS TO CREATE A
STRUCTURE IN IRAQ WHERE THE
SUNNIS AND KURDS CAN COOPERATE
WITH THE SHIITE FORCES, WHERE
YOU CAN REBUILD THE IRAQI FORCES
WITHOUT HAVING THEM TAKE SIDES
IN AN ETHNIC OR SECTARIAN CIVIL
WAR.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE WE
CONFIDENT THAT THE IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES CAN BE TRAINED
UP AND NOT WALK OFF THE
BATTLEFIELD LIKE THEY HAVE IN
PREVIOUS OCCASIONS?
>> WELL, WE HAVE TO BE CAREFUL.
THEY DIDN’T EXACTLY WALK OFF THE
BATTLEFIELD.
THEY FLED.
PART OF IT WAS THEIR LEADERSHIP
IS LEADERSHIP MALIKI CHOSE ON
THE BASIS OF LOYALTY BY SECT AND
USED IN WAYS WHICH ABUSED THE
LOCAL POPULATION.
ARE WE CONFIDENT WE CAN CHANGE
THAT?
NO, WE’RE NOT.
NOBODY CAN BE.
THIS IS UP TO THE IRAQIS AND THE
IRAQI GOVERNMENT.
BUT SO FAR, THERE’S BEEN ENOUGH
PROGRESS TO AT LEAST OFFER HOPE.
AND WE HAVE SEEN COOPERATION
BETWEEN THE KURDISH FORCES AND
THE SHIITE FORCES, AS WELL AS
THE IRAQI FORCES.
WE HAVE SEEN U.S. ADVISERS HELP
THE IRAQI FORCES AT LEAST TRY TO
TAKE BACK TERRITORY IN AREAS
LIKE TIKRIT.
SO THERE ARE SOME POSITIVE
SIGNS.
THERE ARE CERTAINLY NO
GUARANTEES.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE ANY
AMOUNT OF RELIGIOUS PRESSURE
THAT THE LEADERSHIP IN THE
REGION CAN BRING TO BEAR ON
ISIS?
>> WELL, THAT’S A CRITICAL
QUESTION.
THE ANSWER IS NOT PRESSURE, BUT
THE PROBLEM IS WE IN THE WEST,
WHETHER IT’S IN THE THE UNITED
STATES OR ITS EUROPEAN ALLIES,
CAN NEVER MAKE AN ARGUMENT THAT
WE’RE EITHER AN ISLAMIC STATE OR
THAT WE’RE ARABS.
SAUDI ARABIA, THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES, JORDAN CAN.
TURKEY CAN MAKE AN ARGUMENT, AND
IT CAN JOIN IN THIS.
SO ONE OF THE KEY ISSUES IS TO
HAVE THE CLERICS IN THE STATES
THAT ARE AROUND THE ISLAMIC
STATE, TO HAVE THEM MAKE THE
CASE AS TO JUST HOW EXTREME THE
ISLAMIC STATE IS, HOW MUCH IT
HAS DEPARTED FROM THE REAL
VALUES OF ISLAM.
THE IDEOLOGICAL DIMENSION HERE
IS AS CRITICAL AS THE MILITARY
OR THE POLITICAL OR THE ECONOMIC
DIMENSION.
>> Sreenivasan: WOULD ANY OF
THOSE COUNTRIES IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS SEND IN GROUND
TROOPS?
>> I THINK THE ANSWER IS, IT
WOULD BE VERY DIFFICULT.
IT’S NOT CLEAR WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF YOU SENT IN SAUDI OR
JORDANIAN FORCES.
AND CERTAINLY, TURKISH FORCES
WOULD NOT BE AN ELEMENT THAT
WOULD REALLY CONTRIBUTE TO
STABILITY.
THE PROBLEM IN IRAQ,
ESSENTIALLY, IS YOU NEED TO HAVE
IRAQIS ON THE GROUND.
THEY DON’T HAVE TO BE SUNNI, BUT
THEY TO BE PART OF A GOVERNMENT
THAT SUNNIS CAN TRUST, AND THE
SAME IS TRUE OF THE KURDS.
AND WHEN IT COMES DOWN TO SYRIA,
THE FACT IS, WALKING IN TO THAT
PARTICULAR MESS, WE’RE NOT
SIMPLY TALKING ABOUT THE ISLAMIC
STATE, OR AL-NUSRA, OR THE
SO-CALLED MODERATE REBELS, BUT
YOU HAVE MORE THAN 70
FRAGMENTED ELEMENTS IS NOT
SOMETHING THAT CAN EASILY BE
DONE FROM THE OUTSIDE.
IT’S EVEN MORE DIFFICULT FOR THE
UNITED STATES TO SEND IN GROUND
TROOPS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ARTHONY CORDESMAN JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WE WANTED TO
FOLLOW UP TONIGHT ON YESTERDAY’S
UNEMPLOYMENT REPORT.
THE GOVERNMENT REPORTED THAT
142,000 JOBS WERE CREATED LAST
MONTH, WELL BELOW MOST
EXPECTATIONS.
EVEN SO, THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
DROPPED FROM 6.2% TO 6.1%, IN
LARGE PART BECAUSE WHAT’S KNOWN
AS THE PARTICIPATION RATE FELL.
IN OTHER WORDS, EVEN MORE
AMERICANS DROPPED OUT OF THE
WORKFORCE.
FOR MORE ABOUT ALL THIS, WE ARE
JOINED FROM WASHINGTON BY
SUDEEP REDDY, AN ECONOMICS
EDITOR AT THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
SO, ONE OF THE ARTICLES IN THE
"JOURNAL" SAID 60,000 PEOPLE
DROPPED OUT OF THE LABOR FORCE
LAST MONTH.
PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE FOR US.
>> THAT’S RIGHT.
WE’VE SEEN OVER THE COURSE OF
THE RECOVERY MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
JUST GIVING UP HOPE, DROPPING
OUT.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF PEOPLE
APPEAR TO BE DROPPING OUT, JUST
BECAUSE THEY CAN’T FIND GOOD
JOBS AND IT’S NOT WORTH STAYING
IN.
SO TO SEE THAT MANY PEOPLE PULL
OUT, RIGHT NOW, THE LABOR FORCE
PARTICIPATION RATE IS AROUND
63%.
THAT MEANS THERE ARE MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE WHO WERE IN THE LABOR
FORCE BEFORE, BEFORE THE
RECESSION STARTED IN 2007, WHO
AREN’T COMING BACK IN, EVEN WHEN
WE SEE IMPROVEMENT IN THE
OVERALL ECONOMY, IMPROVEMENT IN
THE LABOR MARKET.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE
SOME OF THE LONG-TERM
CONSEQUENCES OF THIS LOW
PARTICIPATION RATE?
>> FOR THE INDIVIDUALS, THEY’RE
REALLY QUITE TRAGIC.
IT MEANS THAT IF YOU’RE NOT IN
THE LABOR FORCE, IN A JOB THAT
SUITS YOUR SKILLS, THAT MEANS
YOU’RE GOING TO SPEND DECADES
DOWN THE LINE PROBABLY EARNING
LESS THAN YOU WOULD HAVE EARNED
OTHERWISE BECAUSE YOU START OUT
AT A LOWER BASE.
YOU’RE NOT GETTING THE KINDS OF
INCREASES THAT YOU WOULD EXPECT
IN PAY AND IN JOB QUALITY.
THAT CAN STUNT YOU AND THERE’S
RESEARCH THAT SHOWS THAT IT CAN
STUNT YOUR CHILDREN AS WELL.
THAT’S WHY IT’S A BIG RISK THAT
WAY.
IT HURTS THE OVERALL ECONOMY IN
MUCH BROADER WAYS.
AN ECONOMY RELIES ON PEOPLE
WORKING AT THEIR FULL POTENTIAL.
IT RELIES ON PEOPLE BEING--
PARTICULARLY EDUCATED PEOPLE,
BEING INVOLVED IN THE LABOR
FORCE, LOOKING FOR GOOD
OPPORTUNITIES, LOOKING FOR GOOD
JOBS.
AND YOU SEE IT IN PLENTY OF
ECONOMIES AROUND THE WORLD, WHEN
YOU DON’T HAVE PEOPLE WORKING AT
THEIR FULL POTENTIAL, IT’S A
DEGRADATION OF THE ECONOMY THAT
REDUCES THE POTENTIAL TO GROW
AND THE POTENTIAL FOR JOB
CREATION, FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP,
FOR ALL THE THINGS THAT YOU
WOULD EXPECT TO SEE IN A
VIBRANT, THRIVING ECONOMY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
AND ABOUT THOSE WHO ARE WORKING,
ARE THEIR WAGES RISING?
ARE THEY TURNING AROUND AND
SPENDING MORE?
>> UNFORTUNATELY, THEIR WAGES
ARE NOT RISING VERY MUCH.
WE’RE SEEING A VERY TWO-TRACK
ECONOMY RIGHT NOW.
ON ONE HAND, YOU SEE THE
WEALTHIEST AMERICANS-- AND THERE
HAVE BEEN SOME REPORTS THIS WEEK
WITH NEW DATA SHOWING THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN MAKE, THE
MOST GAINS, THE TOP 1% TO 3%,
THEY’RE DOING QUITE WELL, PARTLY
BECAUSE THE STOCK MARKET HAS
BEEN GOING UP SO STRONGLY OVER
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS.
EVERYONE ELSE, THE OTHER 97% OF
AMERICANS, ARE GENERALLY SEEING
STAGNANT WAGES.
THAT IS WHY YOU’RE NOT SEEING
CONSUMER SPENDING TAKE OFF.
YOU SEE AN ECONOMY THAT ON THE
SURFACE LOOKS LIKE IT’S
IMPROVING BASED ON ALL THE
NUMBERS, BUT THE WAY EVERYONE’S
REACTING TO IT, IT REALLY ISN’T
GAINING THAT MUCH TRACTION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
SUDEEP REDDY OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE STORY, OUR ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
OUR FOCUS TONIGHT: THE
EXTRAORDINARY SENSORY POWER OF
ANIMALS TO DETECT THINGS EARLIER
THAN WE SOMETIMES CAN.
DOGS CAN BE TRAINED TO HELP
DIABETICS BY DETECTING WHEN
BLOOD SUGAR LEVELS ARE TOO LOW
OR TOO HIGH, AND ALERTING THEIR
OWNERS.
NOW, SCIENTISTS ARE LOOKING INTO
THEIR ABILITIES TO TELL US WHEN
WE HAVE CANCER.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
DR. EMILY SENAY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: YOU’VE SEEN THEM ON
THE STREETS HELPING THE BLIND,
AT AIRPORTS AND TRAIN STATIONS
SNIFFING FOR EXPLOSIVES, AND AT
THE SCENE OF EARTHQUAKES
SEARCHING FOR SURVIVORS.
BUT EVER SINCE HER FAMILY GOT A
DOBERMAN PUPPY, THIS 55-YEAR-OLD
RETIRED MAGAZINE EDITOR FROM NEW
YORK’S STATEN ISLAND BELIEVES
THERE MAY BE ANOTHER WAY FOR
DOGS TO SAVE LIVES.
ONE NIGHT IN THE SPRING OF 2011,
A COUPLE OF WEEKS AFTER GETTING
A NEW PUPPY, DIANE PAPAZIAN
NOTICED HER DOG, TROY, BEHAVING
STRANGELY.
>> HE’S IN BED WITH US, AND HE
IS IN BETWEEN MY HUSBAND AND
MYSELF, AND... SO, HIS HEAD IS
RIGHT HERE.
AND HE IS NUZZLING UP AGAINST MY
LEFT SIDE, AND HE KEEPS
NUZZLING, AND HE’S NUZZLING, AND
HE’S NOT STOPPING.
AND I’M THINKING, WHAT IN THE
HECK IS GOING ON WITH THIS DOG?
CUT IT OUT, YOU KNOW, THAT’S SO
ANNOYING.
WHAT ARE YOU DOING?
AND HE KEPT DOING IT
PERSISTENTLY, LIKE IT WASN’T
JUST ONCE OR TWICE; IT WAS FOR A
FEW MINUTES THAT HE KEPT
NUZZLING.
SO, FINALLY I SAID, "WHAT IN THE
HECK IS HE DOING?"
SO, I STARTED TO ITCH, BECAUSE
I’M HIGHLY ALLERGIC, AND THAT’S
WHEN I FELT THE LUMP.
>> Reporter: JUST DAYS AFTER
DISCOVERING THE LUMP, DOCTORS
FOUND A TUMOR THREE CENTIMETERS
LONG.
DIANE WAS DIAGNOSED WITH AN
AGGRESSIVE FORM OF STAGE TWO
BREAST CANCER.
SHE’D GONE FOR A MAMMOGRAM SIX
MONTHS EARLIER WHICH WAS CLEAR,
AND WASN’T DUE FOR ANOTHER
MAMMOGRAM UNTIL ANOTHER SIX
MONTHS.
WHEN YOU WENT TO THE DOCTOR, DID
YOU SAY, "YOU KNOW, MY DOG SORT
OF ALERTED ME TO THIS?"
>> YES.
>> Reporter: WHAT DID THEY SAY
WHEN... WHEN THEY HEARD YOU...
HEARD YOUR STORY?
>> WELL, I DON’T THINK... I
THINK THEY KIND OF PARTLY
THOUGHT I WAS A LITTLE CRAZY.
BUT I THINK THAT THEY PROBABLY
HAVE HEARD ENOUGH STORIES ABOUT
DOGS AND THEIR VERY KEEN SENSE
OF SMELL THAT THEY WEREN’T
COMPLETELY SURPRISED.
>> Reporter: DIANE’S STORY MIGHT
NOT BE SO CRAZY AFTER ALL.
FOR THE PAST 25 YEARS, CANCER
RESEARCHERS HAVE BEEN EXPLORING
THE POSSIBILITY THAT CANCER
ACTUALLY SMELLS LIKE SOMETHING,
AND THAT DOGS CAN DETECT THAT
SMELL.
>> GOOD JOB!
>> Reporter: THE IDEA OF DOGS
SMELLING CANCER MAKES PERFECT
SENSE TO DR. CINDY OTTO, A
VETERINARIAN WITH A DOCTORATE IN
VETERINARY PHYSIOLOGY.
OTTO STARTED THE PENN VET
WORKING DOG CENTER AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA IN
2007.
SHE THINKS DOGS COULD BE PICKING
UP ON THE CHANGES IN ODOR
RESEARCHERS BELIEVE ARE CREATED
BY CANCER CELLS.
>> IT MAKES SENSE THAT THEY
COULD CHANGE THE ODORS THAT ARE
RELEASED FROM THAT PERSON.
AND A DOG, WITH THEIR EXTREMELY
SENSITIVE SENSE OF SMELL, MIGHT
BE ABLE TO PICK UP THAT CHANGE.
>> Reporter: AT THE PENN VET
CENTER, RESEARCHERS ARE TESTING
THAT IDEA.
>> YES!
>> Reporter: A TEAM OF FOUR DOGS
LIKE TSUNAMI, A GERMAN SHEPHERD,
AND FOSTER, A LABRADOR
RETRIEVER, ARE BEING TRAINED TO
DETECT BLOOD SAMPLES FROM
OVARIAN CANCER PATIENTS.
OVARIAN CANCER KILLS MORE THAN
14,000 WOMEN IN THE U.S. EVERY
YEAR AND IS ESPECIALLY HARD TO
DETECT IN ITS EARLIEST, MOST
TREATABLE STAGES.
THE DOGS ARE REWARDED FOR
SITTING DOWN AFTER IDENTIFYING
WHICH OF THE SAMPLES CONTAINS
CANCER.
>> YES!
GOOD GIRL.
>> Reporter: RESEARCHERS LIKE
OTTO STARTED INVESTIGATING THE
IDEA OF DOGS SMELLING CANCER
AFTER HEARNG STORIES FROM PEOPLE
LIKE DIANE PAPAZIAN.
>> PEOPLE WOULD REPORT THAT
THEIR DOG WAS ACTING
DIFFERENTLY.
AND THEY WENT TO THEIR DOCTOR
AND THEY FOUND OUT THEY HAD
CANCER.
OR THE VERY FIRST CASE WAS A DOG
THAT WAS BITING AT A MOLE, AND
THAT PERSON WENT IN AND FOUND
OUT THAT IT WAS MELANOMA.
AND SO, JUST TAKING THAT, THE
STORIES THAT PEOPLE HAVE, AND
REALIZING THERE’S SOME REALLY
IMPORTANT INFORMATION IN THOSE
STORIES.
>> Reporter: OTTO ACKNOWLEDGES
THE RESEARCH IS PRELIMINARY--
HER STUDY IS STILL ONGOING AND
HASN’T BEEN SUBMITTED FOR PEER
REVIEW-- BUT SHE SAYS THE EARLY
RESULTS HAVE BEEN EXCEPTIONAL.
>> YES!
GOOD GIRL!
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU SAY
"EXCEPTIONAL," WHAT DOES THAT
MEAN?
HOW ACCURATE ARE THEY?
>> ABOUT 90% OF THE TIME, THESE
TWO DOGS ARE TELLING US, "THAT’S
THE CANCER SAMPLE."
AND THE OTHER SAMPLES THAT ARE
OUT THERE, WHETHER IT’S FROM A
NORMAL PATIENT OR FROM A PATIENT
WITH BENIGN OVARIAN DISEASE,
THEY’RE LIKE, "NAH, IT’S NOT
THAT."
>> Reporter: IT’S NOT JUST THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
AT A MEETING OF THE AMERICAN
UROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION IN MAY, A
GROUP OF ITALIAN SCIENTISTS FROM
MILAN PRESENTED THE RESULTS OF A
STUDY CLAIMING A 98% ACCURACY
RATE WITH TWO DOGS IN DETECTING
PROSTATE CANCER FROM URINE
SAMPLES.
THAT STUDY HAS YET TO GO THROUGH
SCIENTIFIC REVIEW FOR
PUBLICATION, BUT RESEARCHERS ARE
HOPEFUL IT WILL EVENTUALLY LEAD
TO AN EARLIER AND MORE ACCURATE
SCREENING TOOL FOR PROSTATE
CANCER.
>> THE HOLY GRAIL OF ONCOLOGY
HAS BEEN TO TRY TO DEVELOP A
TEST, EITHER IN THE BLOOD OR THE
URINE OR SOME BODILY FLUID, THAT
WOULD ALLOW US TO DETECT CANCER
AT AN EARLY STAGE.
>> Reporter: DR. GARY SCHWARTZ
IS THE HEAD OF ONCOLOGY AND
HEMATOLOGY AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER.
HE’S IMPRESSED BY THE RESULTS
FROM THE ITALIAN STUDY BUT HAS
SOME DOUBTS ABOUT THE 98%
DETECTION RATE.
>> I AM A LITTLE SKEPTICAL ON
THE OUTCOME REPORTED IN THIS
PARTICULAR ABSTRACT FROM THE
MILAN GROUP.
NOW, I MAY BE PROVEN I’M WRONG.
I MEAN, THAT’S THE SCIENTIFIC
PART OF ME.
I’M... BUT BEING A SCIENTIST AS
WELL AS A PHYSICIAN, I THINK WE
ALWAYS HAVE TO QUESTION.
UNTIL WE SEE ALL THE DATA AND
ALL THE INFORMATION, WE
SHOULDN’T MAKE ANY DEFINITIVE
CONCLUSION ABOUT ANY FINDING.
AND AT THIS POINT AND IN MY
ANALYSIS OF THE INFORMATION WE
HAVE, IT’S STILL AN OPEN
QUESTION HOW GOOD THE DOG REALLY
IS.
>> Reporter: AND EVEN IF THE
DOGS CAN BE TRAINED TO DETECT
CANCER, HOW USEFUL WILL THAT
TURN OUT TO BE?
DO YOU SEE THE DAY WHEN DOGS ARE
USED IN A PRACTICAL WAY TO
SCREEN FOR CANCER?
>> I WOULD SAY NOT.
I REALLY CAN’T ENVISION A DOG
SI... SITTING IN A CLINICAL
LABORATORY AT A DESK OR IN FRONT
OF A SERIES OF URINE SAMPLES
SAYING... SNIFFING AROUND,
SAYING, "OH, THIS ONE IS AND
THIS ONE ISN’T."
I JUST...
>> Reporter: YOU DON’T SEE IT?
>> THE DOG GETS DISTRACTED ON
THAT SAMPLE, AND IT’S CALLED
MAYBE NEGATIVE WHEN IT COULD BE
POSITIVE.
SO I THINK WE’RE BETTER THAN
THAT.
I THINK WE HAVE BETTER
TECHNOLOGY THAT WE CAN USE NOW
TO FIND WHETHER A PATIENT HAS A
CANCER.
>> Reporter: SCHWARTZ SAYS THERE
ARE MORE PROMISING PROSPECTS FOR
EARLY DETECTION, SUCH AS TESTS
THAT FIND CANCER D.N.A. IN THE
BLOOD, BUT HE ACKNOWLEDGES THERE
MAY BE SOMETHING TO THE SCIENCE
OF USING DOGS TO DETECT CANCER.
>> I SUSPECT THERE IS AN ODOR,
AND THAT’S WHAT THE DOGS ARE
REACTING TO.
DOGS HAVE INCREASED SENSITIVITY.
SO THE DOGS ARE... ARE SHOWING
US SOMETHING.
THEY’RE LEADING US DOWN THE PATH
IN WHICH WE CAN APPLY OUR OWN
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY TO
IDENTIFY WHAT’S IN THE URINE TO
WHICH THEY ARE FINDING
OFFENSIVE, AND TO WHICH THEY’RE
REACTING TO.
AND THIS IN ITSELF COULD BE A
SIGNIFICANT ADVANCE.
>> Reporter: WE SPOKE WITH THE
HEAD OF HEMATOLOGY-ONCOLOGY AT
COLUMBIA, AND HE SAID, "GOSH, I
DON’T SEE THE DAY WHEN DOGS ARE
GOING TO BE SNIFFING SAMPLES,
DETECTING CANCER."
>> I THINK THAT IT’S GOOD TO
HAVE SKEPTICISM.
I THINK WHAT WE’RE LEARNING IS
THAT NOT ALL DOGS CAN DO THIS.
IT TAKES SPECIAL TRAINING.
BUT I ALSO AGREE COMPLETELY THAT
DOGS ARE NOT GOING TO BE IN THE
HOSPITAL LABORATORIES, SNIFFING
SAMPLES.
OUR GOAL WITH THE DOGS IS TO
HELP DIRECT WHERE... HOW WE CAN
BUILD A BETTER SCREENING TOOL.
>> Reporter: DR. OTTO
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT TRAINING
CANCER DETECTING DOGS IS TIME
CONSUMING AND EXPENSIVE AT MORE
THAN $30,000 A DOG EACH YEAR,
AND DOGS CAN ONLY IDENTIFY A
LIMITED NUMBER OF SAMPLES EACH
DAY.
BUT SHE SEES HER RESEARCH
EVENTUALLY LEADING TO A MORE
EFFICIENT SCREENING TOOL.
>> THE DOGS THEMSELVES PROBABLY
AREN’T GOING TO DO THE FINAL
JOB.
THEY’RE HELPING US DESIGN THE
TOOL THAT WILL THEN BECOME THE
SCREENING TOOL.
SOMETHING THAT IS MORE
AUTOMATED, SOMETHING THAT IS
INEXPENSIVE AND CAN SCREEN
THOUSANDS OF WOMEN, MILLIONS OF
WOMEN A YEAR.
>> Reporter: THAT’S WHERE DR.
CHARLIE JOHNSON COMES IN.
>> SOME OF THE NANOTUBES, HUH?
>> Reporter: HE’S A PHYSICIST AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
USING NANOTECHNOLOGY TO DEVELOP
WHAT AMOUNTS TO AN ELECTRONIC
NOSE CAPABLE OF SMELLING CANCER.
SO ONE DAY HIS DEVICE MIGHT BE
PROGRAMMED TO MEASURE THE GASES
AND COMPOUNDS EMITTED FROM
TUMORS THAT DR. OTTO’S DOGS ARE
SMELLING.
>> YES!
WHAT A GOOD GIRL!
>> OUR IDEA IS TO CREATE A
LITTLE DEVICE THAT CAN ACTUALLY
SMELL THE VAPORS IN THE AIR AND
USE IT TO SMELL THE VAPORS THAT
ARE EMITTED BY BLOOD SAMPLES AND
TO TELL WHICH PEOPLE HAVE CANCER
BASED ON THAT INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: CAN YOUR ROBOTIC
NOSE BEAT A DOG’S NOSE YET?
>> THE BEST WE CAN HOPE FOR, I
THINK, WILL BE TO EQUAL THE
DOG’S NOSE.
THE DOGS ARE AMAZING.
I MEAN, I THINK ONE THING WE
HAVE DONE IS, WE HAVE
DEMONSTRATED OUR ABILITY TO
DETECT A VERY SMALL AMOUNT OF A
CHEMICAL THAT PEOPLE CANNOT
SMELL AT ALL.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON HOPES TO
CREATE A CANCER DETECTING DEVICE
AS SMALL AS AN iPHONE THAT COULD
BE IN EVERY DOCTOR’S OFFICE, BUT
SAYS THEY’RE YEARS AWAY FROM
THAT GOAL.
>> YES.
>> GO SEEK.
>> Reporter: BUT THE DOG STUDY
GIVES THEM HOPE THAT GETTING
SNIFFED FOR CANCER BY AN
ELECTRONIC SENSOR ONE DAY COULD
BECOME A ROUTINE PROCEDURE.
>> EASY, MOMMY.
EASY...
>> Reporter: AFTER A DOUBLE
MASTECTOMY AND CHEMOTHERAPY,
DIANE PAPAZIAN IS CANCER FREE
TODAY, AND SHE SAYS THAT’S ALL
THANKS TO TROY.
>> I ALWAYS SAY THAT HAD IT NOT
BEEN FOR TROY, I DON’T KNOW IF I
WOULD BE HERE TODAY.
>> Reporter: YOU BELIEVE THAT?
>> I 150% BELIEVE THAT.
I KNOW THAT HE WAS TRYING TO
TELL ME SOMETHING IN HIS OWN
LITTLE, SWEET WAY.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS TUESDAY,
"FRONTLINE" TRAVELS TO AFRICA
AND INVESTIGATES THE WORST EBOLA
OUTBREAK ON RECORD, THE
DEVASTATING IMPACT IT’S HAVING
ON FAMILIES AND HEALTH CARE
WORKERS AS THEY WAIT FOR THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO
RESPOND MORE FORCEFULLY.
HERE’S AN EXCERPT FILMED IN
SIERRA LEONE.
LOCAL NURSES ARE ON THE
STREETS, WARNING THE OUTBREAK
IS WORSENING.
EVEN IN THE DOCTORS WITHOUT
BORDERS HOSPITAL, EBOLA IS
KILLING 70% OF THOSE IT
INFECTS.
BECAUSE SO FEW PEOPLE WHO GO TO
THE HOSPITAL EVER RETURN,
VICTIMS ARE HIDING IN THEIR
HOMES AND INFECTING THEIR
FAMILIES.
THE ONLY WAY TO CONTAIN EBOLA
IS TO ISOLATE THE INFECTED.
THIS MAN WORKS WITH ONE OF
SIERRA LEONE’S DISEASE
SURVEILLANCE TEAMS.
IT’S THEIR JOB TO FIND VICTIMS
AND GET THEM TO THE DOCTORS
WITHOUT BORDERS HOSPITAL.
BUT HE AND HIS SEVEN COLLEGAUES
CAN’T KEEP UP WITH THE NUMBER
OFCASES.
TWO WEEKS AGO, HE WENT THROUGH
A TERRIFYING ORDEAL WHEN HE WAS
QUARANTINED WITH SUSPECTED
EBOLA.
IT TURNED OUT TO BE A FALSE
ALARM, AND HE RETURNED TO WORK.
NOW, HE’S ABOUT TO HEAD TO
ANOTHER CONTAMINATED VILLAGE.
>> IF I GIVE UP, IT’S LIKE I’M
PUTTING MORE PEOPLE AT RISK.
TO TRANSMIT THE DISEASE TO A LOT
OF PEOPLE, AND MANY PEOPLE WILL
DIE.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
HEALTH SAYS ITS INVESTIGATION
HAS LED TO THE DISCOVERY OF
IMPROPERLY STORED SAMPLES OF
RICIN AND PATHOGENS IN ITS
LABORATORIES THAT CAN CAUSE
BOTULISM AND THE PLAGUE.
THE SEARCHES WERE SPARKED BY THE
DISCOVERY OF VIALS OF SMALLPOX
IN JULY.
SOMALIA’S ISLAMIC EXTREMIST
GROUP AL-SHABAAB CONFIRMS THAT
ITS LEADER WAS KILLED MONDAY IN
AN AMERICAN AIRSTRIKE.
AND A RECENTLY RELEASED FRENCH
HOSTAGE FROM SYRIA SAYS THE
FRENCHMAN ACCUSED OF KILLING
FOUR PEOPLE AT THE BRUSSELS
JEWISH MUSEUM LAST MAY HAD
BEATEN AND TORTURED HIM AND
OTHER HOSTAGES IN SYRIA BEFORE
RETURNING TO EUROPE.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
WE’LL PROFILE A SCHOOL IN WEST
VIRGINIA THAT’S TAUGHT YEAR-
ROUND FOR THE PAST 20 YEARS.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.